Labor is not the source of all wealth.
Nature is just as much the source of use values as labor, which itself is only the manifestation of a force of nature, human labor power.But a socialist program cannot allow such bourgeois phrases to pass over in silence the conditions that lone give them meaning.
He can only work with their permission, hence live only with their permission.
Right can never be higher than the economic structure of society and its cultural development conditioned thereby.From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs! 
It is a bad thing to perform menial duties even for the sake of freedom; to fight with pinpricks, instead of with clubs.
I have become tired of hypocrisy, stupidity, gross arbitrariness, and of our bowing and scraping, dodging, and hair-splitting over words.
Consequently, the government has given me back my freedom.It is clear that the arm of criticism cannot replace the criticism of arms.
Material force can only be overthrown by material force, but theory itself becomes a material force when it has seized the masses.
Theory is capable of seizing the masses when it demonstrates ad hominem, and it demonstrates ad hominem as soon as it becomes radical.
To be radical is to grasp things by the root.
But for man the root is man himself.The criticism of religion ends with the doctrine that man is the supreme being for man.
'Wretched dogs! They want to treat you like men!' 
The philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways.
The point, however, is to change it.
A house may be large or small; as long as the neighboring houses are likewise small, it satisfies all social requirement for a residence.
But let there arise next to the little house a palace, and the little house shrinks to a hut.The mode of production of material life determines the social, political and intellectual life process in general.
It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being, but, on the contrary, their social being that determines their consciousness.
From forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn into fetters.
Then begins an epoch of social revolution.
With the change of the economic foundation the entire immense superstructure is more or less rapidly transformed.
This social formation constitutes, therefore, the closing chapter of the prehistoric stage of human society.If anything is certain, it is that I myself am not a Marxist 
The worker's existence is thus brought under the same condition as the existence of every other commodity.The worker therefore only feels himself outside his work, and in his work feels outside himself.Neither of us cares a straw for popularity.
The philosopher, who is himself an abstract form of alienated man, sets himself up as the measure of the alienated world.
In order to abolish the idea of private property, the idea of communism is completely sufficient.
It takes actual communist action to abolish actual private property.Philosophy stands in the same relation to the study of the actual world as masturbation to sexual love.He who can buy bravery is brace, though a coward.It makes contradictions embrace.The product of labour is labour which has been congealed in an object, which has become material: it is the objectification of labour.
Labour's realization is its objectification.Language comes into being, like consciousness, from the basic need, from the scantiest intercourse with other human.
It is in fact not the consciousness dominating life but the very life dominating consciousness.The first premise of all human history is, of course, the existence of living human individuals.
Thus the first fact to be established is the physical organisation of these individuals and their consequent relation to the rest of nature.Communism is for us not a state of affairs which is to be established, an ideal to which reality [will] have to adjust itself.
We call communism the real movement which abolishes the present state of things.
The conditions of this movement result from the premises now in existence.The object before us, to begin with, material production.
The industrial peak of a people when its main concern is not yet gain, but rather to gain.
Consumption is also immediately production, just as in nature the consumption of the elements and chemical substances is the production of the plant.
The individual produces an object and, by consuming it, returns to himself, but returns as a productive and self reproducing individual.
Consumption thus appears as a moment of production.A man cannot become a child again, or he becomes childish.
What's sauce for the gander is sauce for the goose.The unity is brought about by force.The real point is not that each individual's pursuit of his private interest promotes the totality of private interests, the general interest.Money does not arise by convention, any more than the state does.
It arises out of exchange, and arises naturally out of exchange; it is a product of the same.
Money appears as measure (in Homer, e.g.
oxen) earlier than as medium of exchange,because in barter each commodity is still its own medium of exchange.
But it cannot be its own or its own standard of comparison.Surplus value is exactly equal to surplus labour; the increase of the one [is] exactly measured by the diminution of necessary labour.
That is it!
Luxury is the opposite of the naturally necessary.The circulation of capital realizes value, while living labour creates value.
Something that is merely negative creates nothing.The South has conquered nothing — but a graveyard.
Reason nevertheless prevails in world history.
Every beginning is difficult, holds in all sciences.
I pre-suppose, of course, a reader who is willing to learn something new and therefore to think for himself.
The country that is more developed industrially only shows, to the less developed, the image of its own future.
We suffer not only from the development of capitalist production, but also from the incompleteness of that development.We suffer not only from the living, but from the dead.
Le mort saisit le vif!
Perseus wore a magic cap that the monsters he hunted down might not see him.
We draw the magic cap down over eyes and ears as a make-believe that there are no monsters.
The most violent, mean and malignant passions of the human breast, the Furies of private interest.
The commodity is first of all, an external object, a thing which through its qualities satisfies human needs of whatever kind.
The nature of these needs, whether they arise, for example, from the stomach, or the imagination, makes no difference.
Nor does it matter here how the thing satisfies man's need, whether directly as a means of subsistence, i.e.
an object of consumption, or indirectly as a means of production
To discover the various use of things is the work of history.
Wherever the want of clothing forced them to it, the human race made clothes for thousands of years, without a single man becoming a tailor.
Every commodity is compelled to chose some other commodity for its equivalent.
Gold is now money with reference to all other commodities only because it was previously, with reference to them, a simple commodity.
There is a physical relation between physical things.
But it is different with commodities.
Value, therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing what it is.
The law of gravity thus asserts itself when a house falls about our ears.
The religious world is but the reflex of the real world.The capitalist does not produce a commodity for its own sake, nor for the sake of its use value, or his personal consumption.The capitalist's profit is derived from the fact that he has something to sell for which he has paid nothing.
One is conscious that capital generates this new value by its movement in the processes of production and circulation.
But the way which this occurs is cloaked in mystery and appears to originate from hidden qualities inherent in capital itself.
The rate of profit, therefore, depends on two main factors - the rate of surplus-value and the value-composition of capital.The chief means of reducing the time of production is higher labour productivity, which is commonly called industrial progress.
The chief means of reducing the time of circulation is improved communications.
The amount of variable capital invested in his business is something the capitalist himself does not know in most cases.Excretions of consumption are the natural waste matter discharged by the human body, remains of clothing in the form of rags, etc.
Excretions of consumption are of the greatest importance for agriculture.
So far as their utilisation is concerned, there is an enormous waste of them in the capitalist economy.Universal labour is all scientific labour, all discovery and all invention.Violent price fluctuations therefore cause interruptions, great collisions, even catastrophes, in the process of reproduction.
Disguised as profit, surplus value actually denies its origin, losses its character, and becomes unrecognisable.
The transformation of values into prices of production serves to obscure the basis for determining value itself.The real difficulty in formulating the general definition of supply and demand is that it seems to take on the appearance of a tautology.Three individuals are enough for the complete metamorphosis of a commodity, and therefore for the process of sale and purchase taken as a whole.A general increase of wages, all else remaining the same, is tantamount to a reduction in the rate of surplus value.Crude as these ideas are, they arise necessarily out of the inverted aspect which the immanent laws of capitalist production represent in competition.
In commercial practice, the turnover is generally calculated inaccurately.
The rate of profit does not fall because labour becomes less productive, but because it becomes more productive.
The real barrier of capitalist production is capital itself.
Not too much wealth is produced.
But at times too much wealth is produced in its capitalistic, self-contradictory forms.It does not take more time to deal with large figures than with small ones.
The conceptions of the merchant, stockbroker, and banker, are necessarily quite distorted.
Small profits and quick returns appear to the shopkeeper to be the principal which he follows out of sheer principle.
It is in the circulation process that money develops into capital.
Slavery on the basis of capitalist production is unjust; likewise fraud in the quality of commodities.If all capital were in the hands of the industrial capitalists there would be no such thing as interest and rate of interest.
The labour of exploiting is just as much labour as exploited labour.
Capital is now a thing, but as a thing it is capital.
Money is now pregnant.
A bank-note is nothing but a draft upon a banker, payable at any time to the bearer, and given by the banker in place of private drafts.
"credit accelerates the velocity of the metamorphoses of commodities and thereby the velocity of money circulation."At the same time credit accelerates the violent eruptions of this contradiction - crises - and thereby the elements of the old mode of production.Business is always thoroughly sound and the campaign is in full swing, until suddenly the debacle takes place.
Ignorant and mistaken bank legislation, such as that of 1844-45, can intensify this money crisis.
But no kind of bank legislation can eliminate a crisis.
Furthermore, in regard to Asia, all capitalist nations are usually simultaneously - directly or indirectly - its debtors.The Acts of 1844 and 1845 are proof of the growing power of these bandits, who are augmented by financiers and stock-jobbers.
Low money-prices for commodities and a low interest rate do not necessarily go together.Most of the banks in Australia, the West Indies, and Canada, have been founded with English capital, and the dividends are payable in England.
The monetary system is essentially a Catholic institution, the credit system essentially Protestant.
"The Scotch hate gold." In the form of paper the monetary existence of commodities is only a social one.
It is Faith that brings salvation.
the wage slave, it is true, can become a creditor's slave in his capacity as consumer.
the tool becomes a machine.
Usury lives in the pores of production, as it were, just as the gods of Epicurus lived in the space between the worlds.
The more a ruling class is able to assimilate the foremost minds of a ruled class, the more stable and dangerous becomes its rule.
Without the ban on interest churches and cloisters would never have become so affluent.
But a waterfall cannot be created by capital out of itself.
The landlord is always ready to draw a rent,i.e., to receive something for nothing.
But capital requires certain conditions to fulfil his wish.Even a whole society, a nation, or even all simultaneously existing societies taken together, are not the owners of the globe.Value is labour.The conversion of surplus-value into profit, as we have seen, is determined as much by the process of circulation as by the process of production.But what is money? Money is not a thing, but a definite form of value, hence, value is again presupposed.
[Here the manuscript breaks off.]
Under the ideal measure of values there lurks the hard cash.
We see then, commodities are in love with money, but "the course of true love never did run smooth".
Hence money may be dirt, although dirt is not money.
Each piece of money is a mere coin, or means of circulation, only so long as it actually circulates.
Capital is money, capital is commodities.
By virtue of it being value, it has acquired the occult ability to add value to itself.
It brings forth living offspring, or, at the least, lays golden eggs.
It is in this sense that Franklin says, "war is robbery, commerce is generally cheating."
And his money he cannot eat.
A spider conducts operations that resemble those of a weaver, and a bee puts to shame many an architect in the construction of her cells.— man's heart is a wonderful thing, especially when carried in the purse —
Capital is dead labor,that vampire-like, only lives by sucking living labor, and lives the more, the more labor it sucks.In the United States of North America, every independent movement of the workers was paralysed so long as slavery disfigured a part of the Republic.
Labour cannot emancipate itself in the white skin where in the black it is branded.
The tool, as we have seen, is not exterminated by the machine.
Unlimited exploitation of cheap labour-power is the sole foundation of their power to compete.In capitalist society spare time is acquired for one class by converting the whole life-time of the masses into labour-time.
Classical political economy nearly touches the true relation of things, without, however,consciously formulating it.
This it cannot so long as it sticks in its bourgeois skin.
If production be capitalistic in form, so, too, will be reproduction.
In reality, the labourer belongs to capital before he has sold himself to capital.
Accumulate, accumulate! That is Moses and the prophets!
But if the labourers could live on air they could not be bought at any price.
Capital grows in one place to a huge mass in a single hand, because it has in another place been lost by many.
This is centralisation proper, as distinct from accumulation and concentration.The Irish famine of 1846 killed more than 1,000,000 people, but it killed poor devils only.
To the wealth of the country it did not the slightest damage.
Every one knows that there are no real forests in England.The deer in the parks of the great are demurely domestic cattle, fat as London alderman.
One capitalist always kills many.
The monopoly of capital becomes a fetter upon the mode of production, which has sprung up and flourished along with, and under it.This integument is burst asunder.
The knell of capitalist private property sounds.
The expropriators are expropriated.
In a constantly revolving circle every point is simultaneously a point of departure and a point of return.
If we interrupt the rotation, not every point of departure is a point of return.A circuit performed by a capital and meant to be a periodical process, not an individual act, is called its turnover.
The duration of this turnover is determined by the sum of its time of production and its time of circulation.
As a beast of toil an ox is fixed capital.
If he is eaten, he no longer functions as an instrument of labour, nor as fixed capital either.
So far as living instruments of labour are concerned, for instance horses, their reproduction is timed by nature itself.
Their average lifetime as instruments of labour is determined by the laws of nature.
As soon as this term has expired they must be replaced by new ones.
A horse cannot be replaced piecemeal; it must be replaced by another horse.
We have just seen that, apart from money-capital, circulating capital is only another name for commodity-capital.
But to the extent that labour power circulates in the market,it is not capital, no form of commodity-capital.
It is not capital at all; the labourer is not a capitalist, although he brings a commodity to market, namely his own skin.Anyone wanting a new house picks one from among those built on speculation or still in process of construction.
The builder no longer works for his customers but for the market.
The capitalist cannot store labour-power in warehouses after he has bought it, as he may do with the raw material.
In capitalist society however where social reason always asserts itself only post festum great disturbances may and must constantly occur.
But simultaneously with the development of capitalist production the credit system also develops.
The money-capital which the capitalist cannot as yet employ in his own business is employed by others, who pay him interest for its use.The aggregate capital appears as the capital stock of all individual capitalists combined.
This joint stock company has in common with many other stock companies that everyone knows what he puts in, but not what he will get out of it.
Since the working-class lives from hand to mouth,it buys as long as it has the means to buy.Capitalist production does not exist at all without foreign commerce.The process is so complicated that it offers ever so many occasions for running abnormally.